Prediction of Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) of Turbofan Engine using Machine Learning 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8326010&tag=1

Vimala Mathew, Tom Toby, Vikram Singh, B Maheswara Rao, M Goutham Kumar
Information Technology Group, National Institute of Electronics and Information Technology,
NIT Campus PO, Calicut, Kerala, India
vimala@calicut.nielit.in

Abstract— Maintenance of equipment is a critical activity for
any business involving machines. Predictive maintenance is the
method of scheduling maintenance based on the prediction about
the failure time of any equipment. The prediction can be done by
analyzing the data measurements from the equipment. Machine
learning is a technology by which the outcomes can be predicted
based on a model prepared by training it on past input data and
its output behavior. The model developed can be used to predict
machine failure before it actually happens.
There are different approaches available for developing a
machine learning model. In this paper, a comparative study of
existing set of machine learning algorithms to predict the
Remaining Useful Lifetime of aircraft’s turbo fan engine is done.
The machine learning models were constructed based on the
datasets from turbo fan engine data from the Prognostics Data
Repository of NASA. Using a training set, a model was
constructed and was verified with a test data set. The results
obtained were compared with the actual results to calculate the
accuracy and the algorithm that results in maximum accuracy is
identified.
We have selected ten machine learning algorithms for
comparing the prediction accuracy. The different algorithms
were compared to obtain the prediction model having the closest
prediction of remaining useful lifecycle in terms of number of life
cycles.
Keywords— Predictive Maintenance, Machine Learning, Big
Data Analytics, Random Forest.
I. INTRODUCTION
Prediction of equipment maintenance requirements helps
the businesses to plan maintenance of equipment before the
failure occurs. Predictive maintenance can save lot of time and
energy as it avoids the need for doing unnecessary maintenance
activities, as in the case of periodical maintenance [2], [6].
Nowadays sensors are fitted in equipment in factories and
these sensors are capturing huge amount of data and it is being
stored into large storage devices including cloud servers. The
behavior of the sensor data contain useful information to decide
what may lead to an equipment failure. So maintenance
decision is now converted into a data analytics problem termed
as predictive analytics [3], [5]. 
For an airplane to move through the air, some kind of
propulsion system should generate a thrust. Most modern
airliners use turbofan engines for this. Hence predicting the
remaining useful lifetime of a turbofan engine is critical for
scheduling aircraft maintenance. An attempt is made in this
paper to analyze the historical data and evaluate different
machine learning approaches best suited for accurately
predicting the metric. The dataset used consists of run-tofailure sensor measurements from degrading turbofan engines.
Predictive maintenance has received much attention
recently. There are two ways of doing predictive maintenance.
The first is the classification approach in which it predicts the
possibility of failure in next n-steps. Or it can be regression
approach where it predicts the time left before the next failure,
called Remaining Useful Life (RUL) [7].
This paper deals with the regression approach, mainly the
machine learning algorithms used for prediction and a
performance comparison of these algorithms are carried out.
II. METHODOLOGY
This section presents the methodology that has been
followed. Section II-A describes the dataset used. Section II-B
describes the method used for prediction as a flow chart.
Section II-C includes the experimental set up. Section II-D
lists the algorithms implemented for predicting the results.
A. Dataset
The dataset is taken from NASA data repository. The
dataset selected includes the run-to-failure sensor
measurements from degrading turbofan engines. Although the
turbo fan engines are of same type, each engine starts with
different degree of initial conditions and there are variations in
the manufacturing process of the engines, which are not known
to the user.
 For the turbo fan engines under consideration, the
performance of each engine can be changed by adjusting three
operational settings. Each engine has 21 sensors collecting
different measurements related to the engine state at runtime.
The main characteristic of the dataset is that it is a time series
data, the schema of which is included in Table I. 

TABLE I. DATASET SCHEMA
Index Data Fields Types Descriptions
1 Id Integer Aircraft Engine Identifier
2 Cycle Integer Time, in cycles
3 Setting1 Double Operational Setting 1
4 Setting2 Double Operational Setting 2
5 Setting3 Double Operational Setting 3
6 S1 Double Sensor Measurement 1
7 S2 Double Sensor Measurement 2
8 … .. ..
9 S21 Double Sensor Measurement 21
At the beginning of the time series, the engine's operation
is normal. After many cycles, a fault is developed in the
engine and gradually the engine fails.
Three data sets were provided as text files for training,
testing and measurement of accuracy as part of our approach.
The datasets available were
• Training data: It is the aircraft engine’s run-to-failure
data.
• Testing data: It is the aircraft engine’s operating data
without failure events recorded.
• Ground truth data: It contains the information of true
remaining cycles for each engine in the testing data.
In the training set, the amount of fault grows in magnitude
until the system fails. In the test set, the time series ends some
time before the failure of the system.
Four such sets of data were used for conducting the study.

B. Prediction using Machine Learning Algorithms
Machine Learning (ML) enables computers to do selflearning from the data available, without any explicit programs.
These machines can react to new data, based on its past
learning. Prediction is one of the important applications of
Machine Learning. There are two categories of ML. They are
categorized as Supervised and Unsupervised [13]
In supervised learning, the dataset includes their output
classes which are used to train the machine whereas in
unsupervised learning output class information is not available;
instead the data is partitioned into unknown classes. The
methodology adopted in this paper is to do prediction based on
supervised machine learning. The turbo fan engine dataset
includes a training set and a test set. Both training and test data
includes the actual RUL value which we plan to predict. The
machine is trained using the training set and is tested for
accuracy using the test data as explained in the flowchart in
Fig. 1.

C. Experimental Setup
R programming environment was used to construct the
models and test the results. The data sets were read from files
and the algorithms were applied on it using R language. The
advantage of R environment is that it is easy to port data to R,
process and visualize the results. The results were stored in
variables. These variables were plotted using the visualization
methods available in R. 

D. Machine Learning Algorithms Evaluated
The following machine learning algorithms were used for
predicting the RUL.
1) Linear Regression: It is the most basic type of
algorithm used for predictive analysis. Regression estimates
Fig. 1. Flowchart for the Machine Learning model
are used to explain the relationship between a dependent
variable and one or more independent variables. In the
problem, the RUL is considered to be dependent variable[12].
2) Decision Tree: In decision tree method, a tree is
constructed as the predictive model. The branches of this tree
illustrate the outcome of the decisions taken. The observations
about an item can be converted to conclusions with the help of
this decision tree.
3) Support Vector Machine (SVM): In SVM, the numeric
input variables in the data which are in the different columns
form an n-dimensional space. A hyper plane is a line that
splits the input variable space. In SVM, a hyper plane is
selected to best separate the points in the input variable space
by their class [1]. The SVM algorithm is implemented in
practice using a kernel.
4) Random Forest: Random forest is an ensemble learning
method, It operates by constructing a set of decision trees at
training time and outputting the mean prediction of the
individual trees [8], [9].
5) K-Nearest Neighbors: The K nearest neighbor classifier
classifies objects based on the nearest values with respect to
features. It stores all available cases and classifies a new case
based on the similarity to the stored classes [1].
6) The K Means algorithm: K Means algorithm is used to
find groups in the data. Assuming there are K groups, the
algorithm assigns each data point to one of K groups based on
the features that are provided. Data points are clustered based
on feature similarity.
7) Gradient Boosting Method(GBM): Gradient Boosting
Method is a forward learning ensemble method. It is based on
the idea that good predictive results can be obtained through
increasingly refined approximations. GBM sequentially builds
regression trees on all the features of the dataset in a fully
distributed way - each tree is built in parallel.
8) AdaBoost: AdaBoost, short for "Adaptive Boosting".
Boosting, is a machine learning technique, which produces a
prediction model in the form of an ensemble of weak
prediction models, typically decision trees, with each new
model attempting to correct for the deficiencies in the previous
model [4].
9) Deep Learning: Deep learning is based on artificial
neural networks that are composed of many layers. In deep
learning, features are learned at different levels of the
hierarchy. Learning features like this, at multiple levels of
abstraction, allow a system to learn complex functions
mapping the input to the output directly from data.
10) Anova: Analysis of variance, is a statistical method in
which the variation in a set of observations is divided into
distinct components. It can be used to predict the value of a
variable on the basis of one or more categorical predictor
variables. 

III. RESULTS
Training and evaluation of the Machine Learning Model
was carried out using four data sets, each containing data
collected from 100-250 engines and each engine having 21
different sensor values. The schema of the data set is included
in Table I. All ten algorithms were tested using all four
datasets. The results include the graphs showing the relation
between predicted RUL and actual RUL for each dataset as
described below.
The first set of graphs includes the Machine ID against
RUL plots for the 10 machine learning algorithms under
consideration, covering both predicted and actual RUL values.
The variation between predicted RULs and actual RULs of
dataset1 are depicted in these graphs (Fig. 2). If actual and
predicted points coincide, it indicates maximum accuracy.
In the second set, the variation of actual RULs from the
predicted of dataset1 are plotted in the form of a regression
line. The plots of performance of 10 such algorithms are
included in it (Fig. 3). For the most accurate algorithm,
maximum points will be on the regression line.
In the third set, the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
values between actual RUL and predicted RUL were plotted
(Fig. 4). The RMSE of individual algorithms were compared
for consistency between different data sets, by preparing a
Root Mean Square Error Table and the same was also
visualized as bar plots. The Table II describe the Root Mean
Square Error Table and Fig. 4 represents the 4 barplots of
RMSE values of each algorithm for the four datasets.
The objective was to obtain the algorithm having lowest
RMSE Value. Even though cent percent accuracy cannot be
achieved, error in prediction can be minimized by selecting the
best algorithm. On observation it was found that random forest
algorithm generates the least error. 

TABLE II. ROOT MEAN SQUARE ERROR VALUES
Algorithm 		    DataSet1	DataSet2 DataSet3 DataSet4 Mean
Linear Regression 	  29.91 31.49     45.64 39.81 	36.71
	Decision Tree 	    28.48 34.52 		27.74 45.91 	34.17
	SVM 			          48.17 31.12 		61.53 34.65 	43.86
	Random Forest 	    24.95 29.64 		30.55 33.79 	29.73
	KNN 			          30.79 34.79 		34.44 44.70 	36.18
	K Means 		        78.30 90.19 		72.92 95.45 	84.21
	Gradient Boost 	    27.45 33.35 		31.78 39.30 	32.97
	Ada boost           28.82 33.84 		30.91 39.16 	33.18
	Deep Learning       29.62 42.41 		46.82 38.11 	39.24
	Anova 			        33.50 41.14 		35.46 51.44 	40.38
  
  IV. DISCUSSION
The different algorithms were evaluated in the same way on the
same data for consistent comparison of results. While
predicting RUL, the main objective is to reduce the error
between the actual RUL and the predicted RUL. For each
dataset, the test results were compared with the actual values of
the RUL available in the data set. The root mean squares of the
errors were plotted and it is observed that the best results were
obtained by random forest algorithm. Random forest algorithm
c. RMSE Plot for data set3 d. RMSE Plot for data set4
b. RMSE Plot for data set2 a. RMSE Plot for data set1
i. Deep Learning j. Annova g. Gradient Boost h. AdaBoost
Proceedings of 2017 IEEE International Conference on Circuits and Systems (ICCS 2017)
310
Authorized licensed use limited to: Micron Technology Inc. Downloaded on January 03,2023 at 03:50:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
captures the variance of several input variables at the same
time and enables high number of observations to take part in
the prediction.
It was observed that the performance of all ten algorithms were
consistent in the four different datasets, generating proportional
accuracy for the different algorithms tested.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE
The main objective of predictive maintenance is to predict the
equipment failure. The Remaining Useful Lifetime prediction
has been carried out so as to plan the maintenance requirements
of the turbo fan engine. By doing predictive maintenance,
failures can be predicted and maintenance can be scheduled in
advance. This reduces the cost and effort for doing
maintenance. It increases safety of employees and reduces lost
production time. In our work, we have studied the performance
of ten machine learning algorithms. In future, the algorithms
can be tested for more real time data and always be one step
ahead in predicting the maintenance requirements.
REFERENCES
[1] W. F. Godoy, I. d. S. Nunes , A. Goedtel, R. H. Cunha Palacios and T.
D. Lopes, "Application of intelligent tools to detect and classify broken
rotor bars in three-phase induction motors fed by an inverter," IET
Electric Power Applications, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 430-439, 2016.
[2] M. Canizo, E. Onievay, A. Condez, S. Charramendietax and S. Trujillo,
"Real-time predictive maintenance for wind turbines using big data
frameworks," in IEEE International Conference on Prognostics and
Health Management (ICPHM), 2017.
[3] C. Yang, Q. Chen, Y. Yang and N. Jiang, "Developing predictive
models for time to failure estimation," in Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE
20th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperation
Work in Design, 2016.
[4] G. Wang, T. Xu, H. Wang and Y. Zou, "AdaBoost and least square
based failure prediction of railway turnouts," in 9th International
Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design, 2016.
